lucho/lachezar/



Joined: 03 Aug 2004
Posts: 138
Location: bulgaria
	
PostPosted: Thu Aug 10, 2006 6:42 am    Post subject: metals cast in KILN 	Reply with quote Report Post
Has anyone done metal (bronze, aluminum...) casting in the kiln? As far as I know, tempeartures are not so high, so I thought a pot melt maybe possible.
What about mould material/mix and core matrial/mix?

Maybe a link describing the whole proces?
Thanks!
Lucho


Back to top 	
View user's profile Send private message Send e-mail
John Kurman



Joined: 23 Apr 2003
Posts: 142
Location: Chicago, IL
	
PostPosted: Thu Aug 10, 2006 10:17 am    Post subject: 	Reply with quote Report Post
Yeah, it can be done. I've never done it in a kiln. Not quite sure why you would want to do it that way, but, yeah, you can do it. The mold/core material traditionally used by metal casters is luto (ludo) investment which is a mixture of plaster and sand and clay or grog or, basically, silica. In other words, the same mixture of materials as is used in glass molds (where do you think glass casters got their investment formulations from?).

I've cast bronze, aluminum, lead, pewter, silver, 
and gold in plaster/silica molds and flasks. 
I've never done more than 5-10 pounds. 
The mold material has to be thick as the specific gravity of metals 
is much higher than glass - which means big, fat, cumbersome molds. 
For large castings, the mold quickly becomes very heavy and unwieldy. 
Anything beyond open faced molds (complex form, figures, etc.) 
requires just a shitload of gates and vents.

Basic metal terminology: Shitload: A lot, for neolithic types like me, 
this means more than the number 5. 
A gate is any inlet tube that allows metal to enter the form. 
A sprue is the main inlet gate where the metal is poured in. 
A riser is a reservoir cavity connected to the sprue and/or gatges 
that replaces metal during cooling/shrinkage. 
A vent is an outlet tube that allows air to escape. 
A lot people use the word sprue when they actually mean vent.

No need to do a pot melt. Just put a chunk of metal in the form and fire away. 
I suspect, given the relatively slow heating times, 
that you will end up with a lot of dross - oxidation of the metal. 
This will be particularly true for aluminum and copper. 
You may end up with a big ugly mass of nothing but dross.
 the faster you can heat the metal, the better.


Water must be driven off from the mold material. 
A soak at a temperature of 500C (932F) will liberate all the water.
 This is an oft-quoted benchmark/ballpark temperature that seems to work. 
 Just check for the absence of steam condensation from the mold (or, 
 if you prefer obsolete medieval terms, look for the absence of "water smoke",
  when all the "chemical water" has been released).

There are better ways to do it, though. 
Don't you have access to proper foundry equipment?


Back to top 	
View user's profile Send private message Send e-mail
lucho/lachezar/



Joined: 03 Aug 2004
Posts: 138
Location: bulgaria
	
PostPosted: Thu Aug 10, 2006 12:42 pm    Post subject: 	Reply with quote Report Post
Thank you John!
It's a long story... I'm preparing a show together with a sculpter 
(she works with ceramic, wood and recently she started metals) 
and she is working with a caster but she is not satisfied with 
what he does for her. 
The she has access to several ceramic kilns so I'm looking for tips for her 
being (under-)priviliged of knowing English.


The idea of the pot is exactly to escape the dross; 
if the hole is closed till pouring temperature is acheived 
I hope the dross being lighter then the main metal will float on top of all
 and when the pouring stars it will luckily remain on the walls of the pot 
 or on the bottom/sprue of the work...

Actually we want to cast aluminum and the from castings that 
the metal caster ladled the aluminum was a lot more drossy than the bronze.

Thanks again!
Lucho


Back to top 	
View user's profile Send private message Send e-mail
Keoni



Joined: 19 Mar 2005
Posts: 76
Location: Vancouver, Wa
	
PostPosted: Thu Aug 31, 2006 8:15 pm    Post subject: 	Reply with quote Report Post
I spoke with a metal artist about this. He was of the opinion that if you put a chunk of metal [aluminum] in a mold and melt it, that the oxidation would be pushed into the face of the mold and leave you with a very ugly piece. His suggestion was to make crucibles out of iron and load them with your metal, run the kiln up to 1300 and pour the metals into the mold.

I could do this in my kiln [30x42] if I kept the size of everything relative, 
but the hassle factor was enough to put me off it for now...
too much to do with glass yet.

Best,

Keoni
www.keonicast.com


Back to top 	
View user's profile Send private message
lucho/lachezar/



Joined: 03 Aug 2004
Posts: 138
Location: bulgaria
	
PostPosted: Sat Sep 02, 2006 6:46 am    Post subject: 	Reply with quote Report Post
Thank you for this input!
Lucho

